[Applause]
so I'm going to tell you another
story and this time why this
story because
it brings together themes of
the highest possible
aim
responsibility and meaning and cultural
renewal and it's a it's an amazing
story it's the story of
Jonah and I I like
to tell this story partly because it's
one of the stories that
cynical imag
unimaginative materialist reductionist
atheists point to when they take
ignorant pot shots at the foundation of
Western
civilization and
so it's a useful story to
tell as an antidote to that
attitude so when we meet
Jonah the protagonist of this story we
we don't know anything about him he's an
ordinary man as far as we can tell and
we can infer that because we don't know
anything about him when the
Story begins if his life had been
notable with regard to his Destiny then
we'd have biographical material but we
don't and so we can make the assumption
that he's
you right he's
another archetypal every man and
he's an every man with a problem and
that's actually something useful to know
right at the beginning because people
don't know where to find meaning in
their life and one of the places you
find meaning in your life is in your
problems and this is something very much
worth knowing because you have problems
and you have problems and you have
problems and they're not the same
problems and there are things that
bother you that bug you that torment you
that plague your conscience that don't
plague yours that's idiosyncratic and
it's also not exactly
voluntary right if it was
voluntary you'd have something that
bothered you and you'd think I'd rather
not be bothered by that and that would
be the end of that and that's not how it
works at all if something plagues your
conscience it's dumped on your lap
that's a good way of think thinking
about it and that can be um daunting and
irritating that can make you bitter and
resentful or you can understand that you
actually have your problems and they're
actually
yours and so that is a defining
characteristic of your being and
also the calling of your destiny and
that's what happens to
Jonah this ordinary man a voice comes to
him and
says you're aware of a city
Nineveh um it's historically a City full
of the enemies of your people and you
really have no regard for them but
um I'm God and I'm unhappy with the
citizens of Nineveh and I'm thinking
about wiping them out because of
their unwillingness to abide by the
appropriate moral order and the more
merciful part of me thinks possibly they
could use a second chance and it's your
duty now to go and have a chat with them
and let them know how I'm feeling and
that maybe they should think twice
before all hell breaks loose and
uh away you go and Jonah
thinks well if you're God and you want
to deliver the historical enemies of my
people a good smiting I'm perfectly
happy with that and so I'm disinclined
on moral grounds to do anything that
might be of Aid and also there's 150,000
people in Nineveh they don't know
anything about me I'm a foreigner and an
enemy and I don't think I'm going to go
there and tell them King and all that
they wandered off the straight narrow
path and that God himself is ready to
reap destruction on them and that they
should straighten up because that sounds
like a very bad idea for
me and so if you read that story and you
have any
sense you should be sympathetic to Jonah
because his decision is to make tracks
in the opposite direction as rapidly as
he possibly can he boards a ship and
heads to a city whose name I don't
remember which is as far away from
Nineveh that you could get at that time
and so his reaction to the prompting of
his conscience is I think I'll do
something easier and interestingly for
him easier meant uprooting his whole
life and Vanishing to a new city and so
that's how
much apprehension
this call of conscience produced in him
and
so he jumps on a boat and makes for
fairer climbs so what happens well he's
on the
boat and he falls asleep and so what
does that mean well that's what you do
if you don't follow the promptings of
your conscience you drift into a kind
of what would you say wishfully Blissful
unconsciousness and pretend that you can
escape from your destiny by just not
being there and so Jonah now runs from
his conscience he runs from Destiny he
runs from God and
he Embraces
unconsciousness and that's not a good
strategy although it's an attractive one
and
the story indicates its ineffectiveness
so he's on a ship
and the storm comes and the wind blows
and the waves rise and the ship is
threatened and so what does that mean it
means if you run from the promptings of
your conscience then not only do you
risk drifting into a counterproductive
unconsciousness but you endanger
everyone on board the ship that you're
part of and so what that might might
that be well that might
be your husband or your wife it might be
your family it might be your community
it might be your nation it's whatever
ship you happen to be protected by and
voyaging on and so the storm threatens
and the ship is in danger and Jonah
stays asleep and the sailors are
terrified and they
unload the ship and the waves rise
higher and they have a sense in their
superstitious manner that maybe there's
someone on the ship who isn't right with
God and they cast dice essentially to
find out who it might be and the pointer
points to Jonah and they go and wake him
up and they
say well we're in the midst of a storm
and the ship is threatened and
we cast lots to determine who's at fault
and it pointed to you are you okay with
your God and Jonah says well not exactly
and the sailors who are a heathenish lot
of pagans and polytheist say well who is
your god and they're thinking well he's
like the god of the local oak tree or
the god of the local some minor God that
you could stumble over in the dark and
hardly notice and Jonah says well he's
the creator of the oceans and the land
and the cosmos itself and the sailors
think you probably don't want to piss
him off
then and so he confesses to his
cowardice which indicates actually that
he's fundamentally a decent man because
when there's a crisis and it's possible
that he's responsible he admits to his
error even though you could imagine
doing so under those circumstances might
be uncomfortable
and he implores the sailors to throw
them overboard and they refuse and
because they also turn out to be decent
people and so they work as hard as they
can to bring the ship to port to escape
the storm but they can't the storm gets
worse and worse and finally Jonah
prevails upon them to throw them into
the Briny deep sea and so they do and
then you think
well the story could end there right
Jonah was called on
by the voice that comes to people to
tell them that things aren't exactly
right right in the world and that maybe
they have something to say and he
refused that call and he threatened the
Integrity of the vessel that he was
protected by and transported by and now
he's received his due
punishment but that's not where the
story ends and the reason the story
doesn't end even though Jonah is going
to die right so you might think well
that's as bad as it gets it's like
that's not as bad as it
gets I'm I'm dead serious about that you
know one of the criticisms that's levied
by the freudians for example by the
marxists at the religious enterpris is
that it's a what would you say cowardly
and immature defense against death
anxiety and I would say that an ideology
and a naive belief can be a defensive
mechanism used to protect people
foolishly against fear but if you think
that's the case for the central stories
of the judeo Christian culture then you
don't know anything about the stories
and you don't know anything about life
because the people who think that
religion is a defense against death
anxiety are naive enough to think that
death is the worst thing and that's
that's just where worst gets started and
that's what happens to Jonah because he
holds his tongue when he's called upon
to speak he ends up in the Briny deep
blue sea facing death but then the worst
possible imaginable Beast Rises up from
the abyss and grips him in his jaws and
takes him down to Hell
itself and you might say well that's an
interpolation Dr Peterson and it's not
an interpolation he spends 3 days in the
belly of the Beast
just as Christ is said to spend 3 days
harrowing hell after the crucifixion it
says in the text itself that the Beast
that takes Jonah in its jaws is from the
h from Hell in the abyss and so it's no
interpolation what it means is that well
what does it
mean
exactly uh what does it mean well what
does it mean for a country to de into
hell what does it mean for a country to
descend into the grip of the
totalitarian
nightmare well it means that every
single person who is an inhabitant of
that country has decided to hold their
tongue when they've been called upon to
say what should be said and so then you
end up with a country that is in a state
so dire that there'll be many times if
you inhabit that country where you would
pray to drown in the ocean instead of
being a citizen of that dread State and
so if you hold your tongue when you're
called upon to say what you know to be
true it's not only that you put the ship
of State in Peril in the most immediate
sense it's that you doom yourself and
everyone you love to a journey to the
darkest place you can possibly imagine
and if you know anything about the rise
of totalitarian States and you don't
understand that there's no difference
between a totalitarian state and a state
where every single person
lies about absolutely everything all the
time to themselves and everyone they
love with lies of commission so outright
falsehoods and lies of a mission which
is refusal to say what you know needs to
be said then you know nothing at all
about totalitarian States so how does a
totalitarian state equivalent to Hell
arise it's simple good people have a
burden on their conscience the burden
requires them to speak to speak from the
what would you say the spiritual source
of their heart and they refuse the call
and so Jonah's in the whale
for 3 Days in the depths of hell and
because he's a good man fundamentally he
repents he says I made a mistake I
understand now the gravity of my error
and I will do as I'm bid despite the
threat now the threat is something to
understand because
people say to me with a fair degree of
frequency they congratulate me on my
bravery and that's not
a compliment that goes down particularly
well with me because when I Rose to
public attention in
2016 for opposing my government's
attempts to gain control of my tongue it
wasn't bravery that had anything to do
with
it it was that I knew what to be afraid
of and I was a lot more afraid of losing
control of my tongue than I was of
anything my idiot State could dream up
to do with me and the reason for that
was I knew what happened to people and
to societies who lose their tongue and
so Jonah's in the depth of the Abyss in
the belly of the whale and he repents
and the whale the dragon the beast from
Hell chaos itself spits him on the shore
and he goes to Nineveh and he tells his
enemies who he now loves or at least
acts that way that
they're pushing their luck with their
impropriety and their misbehavior and I
guess spending three days in Hell made
him a convincing speaker as it tends
to and so they listen and they put on
sackcloth and Ashes and the King repent
and the ninevites sort themselves out
and they return to the straight narrow
path and the city's
saved that's not where the story ends uh
Jonah is not actually very happy with
his
success but I'll leave that
aside the story that I've just told made
the
point what's the
point well this is the alliance for
responsible citizenship and you might
ask well what does it mean to to be
responsible and you might ask well what
does it be mean to be responsible in
Germany and this is a country that might
well ask what it means to be responsible
in this manner and one of the things it
means is if you have something to
say you hold your tongue at not just
your peril but the Peril of your of
everything everything you love
everything you know your state the world
itself and that's what would you say a
function
of the fact that you are in fact made in
the image of God and that you do in fact
have something to do and that it's real
and
so someone talked to me during this
conference and said for example you
can't even initiate a conversation about
energy policy in Germany it's like well
what do you what do you mean you can't
exactly do you mean it's okay not to
well the poor are further impoverished
by the fools who believe that we'll move
to planetary salvation by quintupling
energy costs and leaving pollution
intact that is that what you mean by you
can't initiate a
conversation and then you might say well
there's a cost to me and I would say
don't be ever thinking there's no cost
and don't be thinking that the cost to
you for speaking is going to be less
than the cost to you for remaining
silent because that's just not how life
works now it might be the case that if
you're on The Cutting Edge of the
discussion that Cutting Edge might slice
you up too but that doesn't mean that
you'll get away Scot free if you remain
silent it just means that the punishment
for holding your tongue will be deferred
and I would also say that anyone with
any wisdom whatsoever understands quite
clearly that most punishments deferred
are much worse than punishments taken
when the time is right and it might well
be the case that you're in a situation
where you can't say what's true without
running into some Dreadful trouble but
if you're in a situation where telling
the truth means that you'll run into
some Dreadful trouble it means you're
already in a pretty damn bad situation
and you better speak up now I mean it
you better speak up
[Applause]
now before it gets a hell of a lot worse
which it can and will in precise
proportion to your willingness to remain
silent when you have something to say
and then I would say as well and I
suppose this ties this story in with the
story that I told at the beginning of
this
conference well if you don't speak up
you may avert the punishment that would
be do you for speaking up at that point
you may avert that or delay it and maybe
it will come at you in magnified form
later as is very likely because problems
not dealt with promptly tend to multiply
as we all understand if we have any
sense at all but there's some other
price you pay too you know Jonah was
called to be called upon by his
conscience to be the prophetic voice of
redemption even for his enemies it's
like well do you want to do something
with your
life it's difficult life you know you
might want something along with it that
impels you to rise to the occasion and
being a prophetic voice that could
redeem even your enemies that's not such
a bad Destiny and you're going to perish
anyways so you might as well do
something Noble along the way at least
to justify it and so you think well I'll
pay a price for speaking it's like well
the price you pay for not speaking is
that you're not even there but you'll
still have the suffering so that's not a
good price to pay and then you might say
too well if you did have the wise
courage to speak when you have something
to say and that did disrupt your life
and you had the faith and courage to
tolerate that disruption it could well
be that you would thereby embark on the
greatest romantic adventure of your life
because you've now thrown yourself out
of the domain of foolish security and
into the domain of courageous chaos and
God only knows what you might encounter
there
but if you do that voluntarily and you
call upon yourself to abide by the
dictates of your conscience The Best of
You will have the opportunity to reveal
itself and then you'll be the light on
the hill that illuminates the world that
invites people up Jacob's Ladder and
whatever price you pay momentarily for
speaking when you're told not to will be
what would you
say the rewards that you'll obtain by
Aid ing by the dictates of your
conscience when you're true to it will
be so much greater than whatever
punishment you acre momentarily for
speaking that they're not even in the
same conceptual category and that's
actually the definition of a
sophisticated Faith precisely that do
you believe in the truth does the truth
set you free well that doesn't mean
there won't be a price paid for it
there's a sacrificial paid price paid
for everything you get to you don't get
to pick whether there's a
price you get to pick what you're
willing to pay the price for and since
you're going to pay the price you might
as well pay it for everything that's
holy because why would you pick anything
other than that especially when the ship
of state is in danger and you've been
called upon to speak and so it's useful
to understand this because it could be
that you're apprehensive to make your
case known and it could be that you have
reason to be apprehensive but it might
also be that you don't understand the
treasure that waits for you in the realm
of that dragon and you don't understand
that by rejecting that call you're
rejecting everything about you that
would enable you to nobly withstand the
slings and arrows of
Fortune and so if you understand that as
you should and that's a
the story of Jonah is a pointer to that
understanding well then you see that
with that wisdom there's no choice why
would you not do the best thing that you
could
do why would you not do the best thing
you could do and the best thing that you
could do is to
say wisely what you know to be true and
if you have to pay a price then that's
the price you pay knowing that there
isn't a better option than that no
matter what happens to you
so that's the story of Jonah and that's
the parable let's say of responsibility
and that's its association with meaning
and that's the relationship between the
voice within you that calls you to speak
and the force that redeems you and and
the state and the nation and so that's
what you want to serve you're going to
serve
something you might as well serve
that with your upward aim and your faith
and courage intact and so one of the
things you think when you leave this
conference if you're inspired by what
you heard here if you want to have the
faith and courage of a forthright scout
of the future
is say what you think is
true and have the adventure that goes
along with that and the faith that
allows you to understand that if you do
that things will turn out as well as the
truth would allow them to turn out which
is as well as they can possibly turn out
and
so that's a call to Adventure it's a
call to Adventure you have no idea
what'll happen to you if you just say
what you believe to be true that's the
life more abundant that's promised in
the ancient texts right and the
alternative hypothesis is
what you're going to live a life of
falsehood which means it's not your life
it's the life of falsehood that seems
like a bad plan and that abiding by the
falsehood is going to bring to you the
security and adventure of your
life yeah well that's a foolish
story all right everyone thank you very
much for coming today and
[Music]